HIP-1056: Block Streams (#1056)
hiero-ledger/hiero-improvement-proposals: HIP/hip-1056.md

- **File Naming and Retrieval**: v6 record stream files are named after the consensus timestamp of the first transaction
  they contain, requiring Mirror Nodes to perform frequent and costly LIST operations on cloud storage (GCS/S3) to find
  new files. The new block streams use sequential block numbers, eliminating the need for these expensive LIST
  operations. Mirror Nodes will read the stream from a block node that manages its own storage at a lower cost and won’t
  need to deal with cloud storage buckets.
- **Sidecar Data Integration**: In v6 record streams, sidecar files are created to serialize extra data such as smart
  contract logs outside the main record stream. Block streams will incorporate sidecar data into the unified stream.
- **Subset Support**: Any block node operator will be able to decide individually which data in the block stream to
  retain on disk, without breaking the cryptographic integrity of the block stream. Different block node operators in
  different legal jurisdictions can make different decisions about what data to retain. Or, block node operators may
  subset the stream to retain minimal data and minimize storage costs.

> - **Errata Handling**: Errata refers to software bugs where a node executed the transaction correctly but did not record

Reviewer: Alternative option would be the given block node to be temporarily excluded from the network of block nodes and it's block stream invalidated. Then, upon fixing the bug, the block node operator could again join the network, sync the state and continue it's normal work.

Reviewer 2: Errata are needed when a bug on the _consensus node_ produces incorrect output. This section refers to the necessity to change the recorded block chain.  I believe this has been necessary a small number of times since genesis on mainnet.

Block Nodes are not a network; each node is completely independent.  Those details will be specified in a different HIP.

Reviewer 3: @IvanKavaldzhiev will call out the non network block node in https://github.com/hashgraph/hedera-improvement-proposal/pull/1081
Feel free to make comments there also

Reviewer 3: Interesting note @IvanKavaldzhiev .
This may have originated from many early idea but as of yet from 1056 and 1081 there isn't a network of BNs concept in the same way there's a network of CNs.
BNs may communicate with eachother via the APIs noted in 1056 

Just to clarify, you noted a BN is excluded from the network. Technically a BN receives block streams from a CN but is not taking part in consensus or anything. It's true that in certain cases a BNs availability can impact a CN but I want to be clear that a BN isn't part of the network in the same way a consensus node is nor amongst other block nodes. As Joseph said BNs are independent.
This will certainly be an interesting topic that we want to revisit later 

Resolving this comment, thanks.

alongside the consensus nodes. By offloading these services, consensus nodes can dedicate more resources to processing
transactions, thereby increasing network scalability.

Specific examples of services that can be moved to a Block Node include:

- **State Snapshots**: Consensus nodes are currently required to periodically upload snapshots of the saved state for
  backup purposes. Since block streams contain all state changes, block nodes can now provide this service.
- **Reconnect Services**: Reconnect enables nodes that have fallen behind other nodes on the network to request data
  from nodes that are in sync. This process requires significant complexity and resources. We can enhance stability and
  simplify node software by allowing nodes to reconnect with a block node, instead of another consensus node. This
  is a significant and important enhancement to reconnect that is needed for permissionless nodes.
- **Query Endpoints:** As Block Nodes or other consumers of the Block Stream can maintain a live state in sync with the
  consensus nodes, they can answer any queries against state. They can also produce cryptograph state proofs to prove

>   any data in stat (a `state proof`) or any data was part of a block (a `block proof`). For example, they can provide a

Reviewer: Typo: state

Reviewer 3: Updated

contents of one block. All items following an `EventTransaction` before the next `EventTransaction` are related to that
first transaction. Block items for one block can also be packaged in a `Block` message so they can be stored in a
protobuf file and served as a single entity if desired.

![Block Stream Items](../assets/hip-blocks/block-stream-items.svg)

```
NOTE: Update: Add missing Round header after Block Header to image
```

The Block Item design promotes granular stream processing ensuring all items in a block prior to the proof can be sent
out immediately after processing. The result is reduced end-to-end latency for use cases prioritizing speed (e.g.
high-frequency trading). Additionally, this means a following block will not be sent until a block proof is pushed out
over the stream.

#### Design for Input & Output streams

The block stream items are split into two types: input and output. The input items are those known after consensus but
before transaction execution and are the input to transaction execution. Output items are those produced during
transaction execution. These are hashed separately into two different *block stream* merkle sub-trees. This is done so

> we can subset a historical block just be input items, or just output items. That subset block stream could then be used

Reviewer 4: nit: typo: `This is done so we can subset a historical block just be input items, or just output items.`

Reviewer 3: Tried to address this. Thanks

the `map` type in protobuf messages.

### Protobuf Definitions

The following protobuf specification defines a `Block` and it’s components. Notably, the protobufs in this HIP have
partial comments for brevity and where they depend on existing message types defined in HAPI specification they are not
repeated here. The full and detailed specification is present in the public
[hedera-protobufs github](https://github.com/hashgraph/hedera-protobufs/tree/main/block) repository.

#### Block

A collection of block items that represent a single block of transactions on the network.

```protobuf
/**
 * Block is used to serialize all the data for a block into record stream of
 * block files. This structure represents a block on Hedera.
 */
message Block {
    /**
     * The items contained in the block that make up the running hash.
     */
    repeated BlockItem items = 1;
}
```

The order of block items in a block stream is important in some cases it designates useful positions in the stream that
a client may make inferences on. Particularly the start of a `Block`, `Event` and `Transaction` are useful
considerations, in addition to the end of a `Block` or `Transaction`.

#### BlockItem

> A block item is a logical separation of components that together make up a block. A Block item may be one of the 9 types

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
A block item is a logical separation of components that together make up a block. A Block item may be one of the 10 types
```

</aside>

```protobuf
message TransactionOutput {
    oneof transaction {
        /**
         * Output from a crypto transfer transaction.
         */
        CryptoTransferOutput crypto_transfer = 1;

        /**
         * Output from a utilPrng transaction to request a
         * deterministic pseudo-random number.
         */
        UtilPrngOutput util_prng = 2;

        /**
         * Output from a contract call transaction.
         */
        CallContractOutput contract_call = 3;

        /**
         * Output from an ethereum call transaction.
         */
        EthereumOutput ethereum_call = 4;

        /**
         * Output from a contract create transaction.
         */
        CreateContractOutput contract_create = 5;

        /**
         * Output from a schedule create transaction that executed
         * immediately on creation.
         */
        CreateScheduleOutput create_schedule = 6;

        /**
         * Output from a schedule sign transaction that resulted in
         * executing the scheduled transaction.
         */
        SignScheduleOutput sign_schedule = 7;
    }
}
```

```protobuf

> message CryptoTransferOutput {

Reviewer: The crypto create might result in auto account creation. Shouldn't we also add a record for it for those cases?

Reviewer 2: The account creation will be present in StateChanges, no additional output is needed.

Reviewer 3: Need to call out  parent child considerations more explicitly. Might be done but noting here as a reminder to come back in case there's room for improvement

Reviewer 3: The HIP now calls out that each transactions Output corresponds to its given type.

    /**
     * A state identifier for the Topics state.
     */
    STATE_ID_TOPICS = 0;

// many other enumerated values omitted for brevity.
// Full detail is available in the hedera-protobuf github repo.

    /**
     * A state for the `159` upgrade file data
     */
    STATE_ID_UPGRADE_DATA_159 = 10010;
}
```

```protobuf
/**
 * An addition of a new named state.
 */
message NewStateChange {
    /**
     * The type (e.g. Singleton, Virtual Map, Queue) of state to add.
     */
    NewStateType state_type = 1;    
}

/**
 * An enumeration of the types of named states.
 */
enum NewStateType {
    SINGLETON = 0;
    VIRTUAL_MAP = 1;
    QUEUE = 2;
}
```

```protobuf
/**
 * A removal of a named state.
 */
message RemovedStateChange {
}
```

```protobuf
/**
 * An update to a `Singleton` state.
 */
message SingletonUpdateChange {
		oneof new_value {
				/**
		     * A change to the block info singleton.
		     */
		    proto.BlockInfo block_info_value = 1;

		    /**
		     * A change to the congestion level starts singleton.
		     */
		    proto.CongestionLevelStarts congestion_level_starts_value = 2;

		    /**
		     * A change to the Entity Identifier singleton.
		     */

> 		    google.protobuf.UInt64Value entity_number_value = 3;
> 
> 		    /**
> 		     * A change to the exchange rates singleton.
> 		     */
> 		    proto.ExchangeRateSet exchange_rate_set_value = 4;
> 
> 		    /**
> 		     * A change to the network staking rewards singleton.
> 		     */
> 		    proto.NetworkStakingRewards network_staking_rewards_value = 5;
> 
> 		    /**
> 		     * A change to a raw byte array singleton.
> 		     */
> 		    google.protobuf.BytesValue bytes_value = 6;
> 
> 		    /**
> 		     * A change to a raw string singleton.
> 		     */
> 		    google.protobuf.StringValue string_value = 7;
> 
> 		    /**
> 		     * A change to the running hashes singleton.
> 		     */
> 		    proto.RunningHashes running_hashes_value = 8;
> 
> 				/**
>          * A change to the throttle usage snapshots singleton.
>          * <p>
>          * Throttle usage snapshots SHALL be updated for _every transaction_
>          * to reflect the amount used for each tps throttle and
>          * for the gas throttle.
>          */
> 		    proto.ThrottleUsageSnapshots throttle_usage_snapshots_value = 9;
> 
> 				/**
>          * A change to a raw `Timestamp` singleton.<br/>
>          * An example of a raw `Timestamp` singleton is the
>          * "network freeze time" singleton state, which, if set, stores
>          * the time for the next scheduled freeze.
>          */
>         proto.Timestamp timestamp_value = 10;
> 
>         /**
>          * A change to the block stream status singleton.
>          */
>         com.hedera.hapi.node.state.blockstream.BlockStreamInfo block_stream_info_value = 11;
> 
>         /**
>          * A change to the platform state singleton.
>          */
>         com.hedera.hapi.platform.state.PlatformState platform_state_value = 12;
> 
>         /**
>          * A change to the roster state singleton.
>          */
>         com.hedera.hapi.node.state.roster.RosterState roster_state_value = 13;
> 		}
> }

Reviewer 2: A swarm of tab characters seem to have snuck in to this block.
```suggestion
    oneof new_value {
        /**
         * A change to the block info singleton.
         */
        proto.BlockInfo block_info_value = 1;

        /**
         * A change to the congestion level starts singleton.
         */
        proto.CongestionLevelStarts congestion_level_starts_value = 2;

        /**
         * A change to the Entity Identifier singleton.
         */
        google.protobuf.UInt64Value entity_number_value = 3;

        /**
         * A change to the exchange rates singleton.
         */
        proto.ExchangeRateSet exchange_rate_set_value = 4;

        /**
         * A change to the network staking rewards singleton.
         */
        proto.NetworkStakingRewards network_staking_rewards_value = 5;

        /**
         * A change to a raw byte array singleton.
         */
        google.protobuf.BytesValue bytes_value = 6;

        /**
         * A change to a raw string singleton.
         */
        google.protobuf.StringValue string_value = 7;

        /**
         * A change to the running hashes singleton.
         */
        proto.RunningHashes running_hashes_value = 8;

        /**
         * A change to the throttle usage snapshots singleton.
         * <p>
         * Throttle usage snapshots SHALL be updated for _every transaction_
         * to reflect the amount used for each tps throttle and
         * for the gas throttle.
         */
        proto.ThrottleUsageSnapshots throttle_usage_snapshots_value = 9;

        /**
         * A change to a raw `Timestamp` singleton.<br/>
         * An example of a raw `Timestamp` singleton is the
         * "network freeze time" singleton state, which, if set, stores
         * the time for the next scheduled freeze.
         */
        proto.Timestamp timestamp_value = 10;

        /**
         * A change to the block stream status singleton.
         */
        com.hedera.hapi.node.state.blockstream.BlockStreamInfo block_stream_info_value = 11;

        /**
         * A change to the platform state singleton.
         */
        com.hedera.hapi.platform.state.PlatformState platform_state_value = 12;

        /**
         * A change to the roster state singleton.
         */
        com.hedera.hapi.node.state.roster.RosterState roster_state_value = 13;
    }
}
```

Reviewer 3: Updated

     */
    uint64 filtered_path = 3;
}
```

<aside>
💡 *Sidebar: Subsetting and Errata for Block Stream.*
Block stream supports subsetting the block stream through the use of a `FilteredItemHash` to
replace any item that has been removed. The removed item is thus replaced by its hash and the path that was filtered
(some removals may require simultaneous removal of a small subtree), which preserves the ability to verify the
integrity of the block stream and block proof.  Errata are handled similarly for removed items. Adding items *after the
fact* or replacing an erroneous item requires potentially removing a prior item, and adding the correction (errata) as a
new item in the block stream at the point of the “errata” transaction, which is then part of the block proof for the
block where the “errata” was processed.
</aside>

#### Block Proof

The block proof carries the trust of the consensus network to the contents of the block. A block can conceptually be
represented as a binary merkle tree with 4 sub-trees at depth 2 which create the block proof and tree when hashed to
obtain a merkle root.

> ![Root Hashes](../assets/hip-blocks/root_hashes.png)

Reviewer 5: Should be svg not png

Reviewer 3: Updated

repeated here. The full and detailed specification is present in the public
[hedera-protobufs github](https://github.com/hashgraph/hedera-protobufs/tree/main/block) repository.

#### Block

A collection of block items that represent a single block of transactions on the network.

```protobuf
/**
 * Block is used to serialize all the data for a block into record stream of
 * block files. This structure represents a block on Hedera.
 */
message Block {
    /**
     * The items contained in the block that make up the running hash.
     */
    repeated BlockItem items = 1;
}
```

The order of block items in a block stream is important in some cases it designates useful positions in the stream that
a client may make inferences on. Particularly the start of a `Block`, `Event` and `Transaction` are useful
considerations, in addition to the end of a `Block` or `Transaction`.

#### BlockItem

A block item is a logical separation of components that together make up a block. A Block item may be one of the 10 types
noted below.

```protobuf
message BlockItem {
    oneof item {
        /**
         * An header for the block, marking the start of a new block.
         */

>         BlockHeader block_header = 1;

Reviewer 5: BlockHeader and EventHeader missing package so not clear they are input or output

Reviewer 2: This is correct in the `hedera-protobufs` repository, so we probably need to resync this HIP content to that codebase.
Note, there's a [pull request](https://github.com/hashgraph/hedera-protobufs/pull/421) open there to make some additional changes required based on implementation experience (e.g. making the `BlockItems` API use `repeated` instead of singular to improve network efficiency).

set of transaction inputs and outputs as well as resulting state changes and a final merkle root hash was agreed upon
by the majority stake weight of the network. 
In detail the Block Proof is a message in the Block Stream that contains a Ledger ID signature on the root hash of the Block Merkle
Tree, as well as all of the information necessary to, with the Block Items for that Block, reconstruct the Block Merkle
Tree, calculate the root hash, and verify the signature with the network Ledger ID.
2. Block Item Proof - This proof proves that a given object was present in a Block. This is just as powerful as proving
a value was in state. In detail, the Block Item Proof is a Merkle Proof created for a single BlockItem within a Block.
This proves that the network consensus agreed to the content of that specific item (input, output, or state change) in
that specific block. This can prove, among other values, the content of an HCS message, the state of an Account changed
in that block, or the content of a transaction submitted in that block. We can construct a BlockItem Proof from a Block
Proof and contents of the Block. 

> 3. State Proof - This proof proves a given state value at a given block number was agreed upon by a majority stake
> weight of the network. In detail, teh state proof is a Merkle Proof created for a value in network consensus state at a
> particular point in consensus time. This proves that the network consensus state contained a particular value at a
> specific consensus timestamp. This might prove, among other values, the balance of an Account, the state of a Smart
> Contract, or the properties of an HTS non-fungible token. 

Reviewer 2: Minor typo fix:
```suggestion
3. State Proof - This proof proves a given state value at a given block number was agreed upon by a majority stake
weight of the network. In detail, the state proof is a Merkle Proof created for a value in network consensus state at a
particular point in consensus time. This proves that the network consensus state contained a particular value at a
specific consensus timestamp. This might prove, among other values, the balance of an Account, the state of a Smart
Contract, or the properties of an HTS non-fungible token. 
```

Reviewer 3: Fixed

> Each block will contain it's own Block Proof, which provides proof of consensus agreement on the content of the block.
The state hash contained in the proof for block n, however is the hash at the beginning of block n (i.e. the end of the
previous block, n-1). The state hash representing the changes to state made in a given block n is present in the proof
for the next block n+1. State proofs for block n, therefore, must be created using the Block Proof from the following

> block n+1  as well as a live copy of state at the end of block n.

Reviewer 2: Minor adjustment
```suggestion
block n+1  as well as a live, or snapshot, copy of state at the end of block n.
```

Reviewer 3: Adopted

enables downstream state-related services such as state proofs, state snapshots, and reconnect services. It also
provides a low latency feed of the contents of state as it changes to applications. This can open doors to exciting new
latency critical application ideas and concepts that could not be built before.

To enable this, state in the consensus node will be restructured into simple named states. This allows for state changes
to be expressed as simple CRUD operations on named states. This is so downstream consumers do not have to understand the
full complexity of the merkle state tree.

## Personas and User Stories

### Personas
- _Downstream Developer_: A provider of value-added services utilizing block streams
- _Verifier_: Any person or service required to verify the integrity of a block or the information contained within a
  block.

### User Stories
1. As a downstream developer, I want a streamlined feed that contains all event, transactional, and state details of
   the network so that I can offer value-added services to the ecosystem.
2. As a downstream developer, I want each block of data to be verifiable with a single, aggregated signature, so that I

>    can authenticate transactional data without the cost and complexity of downloading multiple signature files for
>    verification.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   can authenticate transactional data without the cost and complexity of processing multiple signatures
   and the limitations of relying on an address book for verification.
```

Reviewer 3: Fixed

---
hip: 1056
title: Block Streams
author: Jasper Potts <@jasperpotts>, Richard Bair <@rbair23>, Nana Essilfie-Conduah <@Nana-EC>, Mark Blackman <mark@swirldslabs.com>
working-group: Jasper Potts <@jasperpotts>, Richard Bair <@rbair23>, Nana Essilfie-Conduah <@Nana-EC>, Mark Blackman <mark@swirldslabs.com>, Leemon Baird, Joseph Sinclair<@jsync-swirlds>, Nick Poorman <@nickpoorman>
type: Standards Track
category: Core, Service, Mirror Node, Block Node
needs-council-approval: Yes
status: Draft
created: 2023-03-20
discussions-to: https://github.com/hashgraph/hedera-improvement-proposal/discussions/1055
updated: 2024-10-01
---

## Abstract

This HIP introduces a new output data format for consensus nodes, called Block Streams, that _replaces_ the existing
event streams, record streams, state files, and signature files with one single stream.
Each block within the block stream is a self-contained entity, including every event and all transactions that were
part of the block, the state changes as a result of those transactions, and a
_network signature_ (using a BLS threshold signature scheme we call TSS) that proves the block was signed by a

> threshold of the network.

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
subset of nodes whose stake accounts for more than 1/3 of the network's consensus weight.
```

outside the consensus network.

**Easy consumption**: The Block stream is designed to be easy to consume by users. Where trade-offs exist between a
small amount of extra work on consensus nodes or a large amount of work or complex understanding needed on consumers,
we have chosen to perform extra work on consensus nodes to produce clean block streams.

**Designed for Streaming or as Block files:** The stream is designed to both be packaged up as self-contained block
files and to be streamed as individual items with low latency.

#### Design for Consolidation

The block stream is designed to be a continuous stream of items. This allows for continuous streaming over gRPC. The
order of items is significant, for example all items between and inclusive of a `BlockHeader` and `BlockProof` represent
contents of one block. All items following an `EventTransaction` before the next `EventTransaction` are related to that
first transaction. Block items for one block can also be packaged in a `Block` message so they can be stored in a
protobuf file and served as a single entity if desired.

> ![Block Stream Items](../assets/hip-blocks/block-stream-items.svg)

Reviewer 7: There are some cases where multiple changes made to a singleton state type over the course of a round will be consolidated into a single change set for that singleton type for the round instead. How do those fit into the stream and block merkle tree? Do they need to be placed somewhere specific both in the stream and in the tree?

Reviewer 2: It all depends on how that affects the merkle tree in consensus state.
As long as we end up with the same state hash in the block node as the consensus node, the state change can be placed after pretty much any transaction.
I _think_ services currently puts all singleton updates, at the end of the block (after the last transaction, but before the block proof).

```

The Block Item design promotes granular stream processing ensuring all items in a block prior to the proof can be sent
out immediately after processing. The result is reduced end-to-end latency for use cases prioritizing speed (e.g.
high-frequency trading). Additionally, this means a following block will not be sent until a block proof is pushed out
over the stream.

#### Design for Input & Output streams

The block stream items are split into two types: input and output. The input items are those known after consensus but
before transaction execution and are the input to transaction execution. Output items are those produced during
transaction execution. These are hashed separately into two different *block stream* merkle sub-trees. This is done so
we can separate out a subset of historical blocks with just their input items, or just output items. That subset block stream could then be used
for transaction replay or transaction execution verification, for example.

![Block Stream Merkle Tree](../assets/hip-blocks/block-stream-merkle.svg)

Consensus nodes have a `state merkle tree`, which is a merkle tree containing the current state of the consensus node.

> The block stream has a separate `block stream merkle tree` which is a merkle tree of all the items in the block stream
> over the entire history of the stream. Of course, older blocks can be represented by their hash rather than the actual
> full contents, so it is possible to have a very large block stream merkle tree *in concept* that is still very efficient
> to use.

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
At each block boundary, the stake merkle tree is a depth two *subtree* of a `block merkle tree`, which is a binary merkle tree whose four subtrees at depth two also include the block's input items, the block's output items, and the merkle tree of the previous block. (Of course hash computation for the block `N` merkle tree reuses the hash already computed for the block `N-1` merkle tree.)
```

#### Design for Verifiability

Existing record files contain the following cryptographic properties.

> Record files are streams in a blockchain, with the hash of previous file included in the next record file, ensuring
> immutability. Additionally, each consensus node on the Hedera mainnet signs a hash of the record files as they are

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
Record file contents are summarized in a chain of hashes, with each file's contents containing the hash of previous file; so that the hash of the current function depends on the contents of the entire record stream. Additionally, each consensus node on the Hedera mainnet signs the hash of each record file as it is
```

Reviewer 7: ...containing the hash of _the_ previous file...

To enable this, state in the consensus node will be restructured into simple named states. This allows for state changes
to be expressed as simple CRUD operations on named states. This is so downstream consumers do not have to understand the
full complexity of the merkle state tree.

## Personas and User Stories

**Personas:**
- _Downstream Developer_: A provider of value-added services utilizing block streams
- _Verifier_: Any person or service required to verify the integrity of a block or the information contained within a
  block.

**User Stories:**
1. As a downstream developer, I want a streamlined feed that contains all event, transactional, and state details of
   the network so that I can offer value-added services to the ecosystem.
2. As a downstream developer, I want each block of data to be verifiable with a single, aggregated signature, so that I
   can authenticate transactional data without the cost and complexity of downloading multiple signature files for
   verification.
3. As a verifier for a network, I want a single, self-contained stream of data with aggregated signature signed by a

>    threshold of stake weights, so that I can cost-effectively confirm that the stream represents the consensus output of

Reviewer 7: We should really decide what terms we are going to use. Some places use `stake weights` and others simply use `weight`. Either is fine as long as it is used consistently. Inconsistent use will contribute to confusion.

>    threshold of stake weights, so that I can cost-effectively confirm that the stream represents the consensus output of

Reviewer 7: We should really decide what terms we are going to use. Some places use stake weights and others simply use weight. Either is fine as long as it is used consistently. Inconsistent use will contribute to confusion.

Reviewer 7: i forgot that I said "either is fine" in this comment. I posted another comment above saying that "stake weight" is confusing. I've always thought this, but know it's a commonly used term so I must have been feeling particularly lenient the day i made this original comment. Happy to discuss offline. I don't want to cause uncecessary churn.

Reviewer 8: There is so much churn left to do.   @poulok,  since we are converging on consensus weight being the integer value of the staked hbar, is `stake weight` an acceptable term?

Reviewer 3: Hmm, we standardized on the "stake weight" term.
I'll make a note to revisit this

   the network.
4. As a downstream developer, I want a low latency feed that provides the state changes associated with transaction(s)
   within a block, so that I can interact with state changes with the smallest possible delay.

## Specification

The Block Stream will be defined by the continuous transmission of Block information defined as follows.
- Each `Block` represents all inputs and outputs of the consensus network for zero or more whole `Rounds`. The maximum
  number of rounds per block will be configurable and start at 1 round per block. It could be increased later if

>   necessary for performance reasons or if round become very frequent and small.

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
  necessary for performance reasons or if rounds become very frequent and small.
```

    - A block *may* be zero rounds because the last block prior to a network "freeze" must communicate the state hash

>       (via a block proof) of the state immediately prior to network shutdown. This is only possible with an extra empty

Reviewer 7: I'm confused by the `(via a block proof)` part here. In normal cases, the state hash is part of the block merkle tree and the block proof has an aggregated signature of the block merkle tree root (although now I realize that this has not been explicitly state in the HIP thus far, and it probably should be). Is this section saying that in a block with no rounds, the proof is simply on the hash of the state root and not a merkle tree root hash that also includes previous block root hash and null padding?

Reviewer 2: A block with no rounds is the same as any other block except for the lack of any content between block header and block proof.
The bullet point is describing a specific case where a block with no rounds may
be required, and describing _how_ that "empty" block resolves a sequence problem.

The wording is _intended_ to explain that, because block proof contains the state hash at the beginning of the block (end of the prior block), the state hash at end-of-block is communicated in the block stream as a field in the block proof for the following block.

Reviewer 7: >the state hash at end-of-block is communicated in the block stream as a field in the block proof

Aha! I had not gotten to the BlockProof proto yet.

      block because the state hash in each block proof is the state hash at the *beginning* of that block/round. This
      delay of state hash communication is required to simultaneously meet Hedera performance goals and also meet EVM
      expectations for immediate access to recent (the last 256) block hash values.
- A `Round` is a sequence of zero or more `Events` that have reached consensus at the same time. Round length in real
  world time depends on internet latency and event creation rate. In Hedera mainnet today it is around 1 round per
  second. In the future this could be shorter to lower latency, but would never make sense to be less than ping time.

> - An `Event` is a sequence of zero or more `EventTransactions` submitted by a single node.

Reviewer 7: A round is more than just its events, and an event is more than just its transactions. Perhaps it is simplest to say "contains" instead of "is" so we don't have to explain the metadata that comes with each.

- Each `EventTransaction` is either a `SignedTransaction` or a system transaction.
- A `SignedTransaction` is transmitted as a byte array, contains the signed transaction bytes of a user-submitted
  transaction exactly as processed by the network, and is followed by transaction outputs and state changes resulting
  from that transaction.
- System transactions are represented by explicitly defined protobuf messages and used for consensus node to consensus
  node communication.

These concepts are core to the Hashgraph consensus mechanism and have direct impacts on the structure of data in the 
streams.

> Block streams are built out of Items. Those items can be delivered in a continuous stream containing one or more blocks.

Reviewer 7: I don't understand. If a block is made up of items, how can those items be streamed such that they contain one or more blocks?

Reviewer 2: The stream contains one or more blocks, which are made up of many items (often thousands).
Agree that this wording is a little awkward at expressing that.

Or they can be delivered as a single block using the `Block` message type container. If a single block is delivered as

> a file it expected to be either a raw protobuf `Block` message with file name of `<BLOCK_NUMBER>.blk` e.g.

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
a file it must be either a raw protobuf `Block` message with file name of `<BLOCK_NUMBER>.blk` e.g.
```

> `0000000000000000001.blk` . With total of 19 digits to allow for 2^63 blocks. Or a compressed file e.g.

Reviewer 9: Currently Block file names are 36-digit strings padding with leading zeroes. [FileBlockItemWriter](https://github.com/hashgraph/hedera-services/blob/develop/hedera-node/hedera-app/src/main/java/com/hedera/node/app/blocks/impl/FileBlockItemWriter.java#L222)

Reviewer 3: Removed this section as it was confused for API and is more an internal block node consideration

Reviewer 2: Just for completion.  I have no idea why the consensus node chose 36-digits, but we chose to restrict file names in the block node to what a Java `long` can represent for efficiency.  It's easy enough to trim or pad the extra 17 `0`s, if needed.

> `0000000000000000001.blk` . With total of 19 digits to allow for 2^63 blocks. Or a compressed file e.g.

Reviewer 7: incomplete sentences here

hash value would match every other implementation. The network values the freedom to implement a compliant Block Stream
consumer using any valid protocol buffer library and any computing language of choice, and therefore chooses not to use
the `map` type in protobuf messages.

### Protobuf Definitions

The following protobuf specification defines a `Block` and it’s components. Notably, the protobufs in this HIP have
partial comments for brevity and where they depend on existing message types defined in HAPI specification they are not
repeated here. The full and detailed specification is present in the public
[hedera-protobufs github](https://github.com/hashgraph/hedera-protobufs/tree/main/block) repository.

#### Block

A collection of block items that represent a single block of transactions on the network.

```protobuf
/**
 * Block is used to serialize all the data for a block into record stream of
 * block files. This structure represents a block on Hedera.
 */
message Block {
    /**
     * The items contained in the block that make up the running hash.
     */
    repeated BlockItem items = 1;
}
```

> The order of block items in a block stream is important in some cases it designates useful positions in the stream that

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
The order of block items in a block stream is important an in some cases it designates useful positions in the stream that
```

         */
        RecordFileItem record_file = 10;
    }
}

```

All items in the block other than the final `BlockProof` and `FilteredItemHash` are either Input or Output items. This
separation is important as they are hashed into two different sub-merkle-trees in the final proof. We did not want to
carry in each block item data representing which tree it was hashed in as that would waste a lot of bytes. So which tree
is defined by the protobuf package that message type is in. The reason they are split into input and output item sets is
this opens the door for using the block stream format to describe the data passed from consensus to transaction
processing.

The division into block items also enables filtering of data based on data type. For example a downstream services could
filter for only transactional data if there is no requirement for event or state information. Another service could
filter on only accounts they are interested in. Block items removed from a filtered stream are represented by one or
more `FilteredItemHash`’s which provide the missing hashes required to validate the filtered stream with the same block
proof as the full stream.

#### BlockHeader

> ### BlockHeader

Reviewer 7: Duplicate Blockheader section titles

```protobuf
message BlockHeader {
    /**
     * Version of the HAPI specification that was used to serialize the block.
     */
    proto.SemanticVersion hapi_proto_version = 1;

    /**
     * The software version used to execute transactions in this block.
     */
    proto.SemanticVersion software_version = 2;

    /**
     * The block number of this block.
     * <p>
     * This value MUST be exactly `1` more than the previous block.<br/>
     * Client systems SHOULD optimistically reject any block with a gap or
     * reverse in `number` sequence, and MAY assume the block stream has
     * encountered data loss, data corruption, or unauthorized modification.
     */
    uint64 number = 3;

    /**
     * The block hash of the previous block.
     * This is here so a client parsing the BlockHeader can optimistically reject
     * a block if this hash does not match the root hash of the previous block.
     */
    bytes previous_block_hash = 4;

    /**
     * A consensus timestamp for the start of this block.
     * <p>
     * This SHALL be the timestamp assigned by the hashgraph consensus
     * algorithm to the first transaction of this block.
     */

>     proto.Timestamp first_transaction_consensus_time = 5;

Reviewer 3: Left as is

>     proto.Timestamp first_transaction_consensus_time = 5;

Reviewer 3: This was updated

    /**
     * The hash algorithm used in this block.
     */
    proto.BlockHashAlgorithm hash_algorithm = 6;

    /**
     * Version of the active address book of the network at the time relating to the network public key
     */
    proto.SemanticVersion address_book_version = 7;
}

// This definition is in basic_types.proto.
/**
 * A specific hash algorithm used within a block.
 *
 * We did not reuse HashAlgorithm here because in all cases for now it will be SHA2_384 and if that's the default value
 * then we can save space by not serializing it, whereas HASH_ALGORITHM_UNKNOWN = 0; is the default for HashAlgorithm.
 */
enum BlockHashAlgorithm {
    SHA2_384 = 0;
}
```

<aside>
🚨 **Open Detail:** How do we define the `first_transaction_consensus_time` of a block with no transactions? Can it be

> first event consensus time if no transactions? what about empty block with no events?

Reviewer 7: Some details and edge cases:
1. For "normal" rounds that contain events and transactions, the round timestamp is equal to the timestamp of the last transaction in the round
2. For empty rounds (no events), the round timestamp is equal to the timestamp of the last transaction in the previous round plus 1,000 nanos, rounded up to the nearest 1,000 nanos. Is there is no previous round, then the round timestamp is the median of the judge created times.

To me, #1 makes no sense at all. An event's consensus timestamp is equal to the timestamp of the FIRST transaction it contains. If the round follow the same rules, the round's timestamp would be equal to the timestamp of the first event and transaction it contains. As far as I'm aware, there is no reason we cannot change the round timestamp to work this way if we want. If we did that, we could just put the round timestamp in this protobuf instead of the first transaction timestamp and call it a day.

If we can't do that or don't want to do that, then we have some other options:
1. Keep the transaction timestamp but make it nullable. If there are no transactions in the round, it is null.
2. Keep the timestamp and make it always populated (with the one exception of an empty block sent after the freeze round), but for rounds with no transactions, it will be the round timestamp
3. Add a second field for the round timestamp which will always be populated (with the one exception of an empty block sent after the freeze round).

None of these sound good because there are exceptions and edge cases that need to be explained.

Reviewer 3: concept of timestamp was sorted out and HIP includes definitions.

</aside>

#### EventHeader

The event header depicts the beginning of an event. All items after this and before the next `EventHeader` or

> `BlockProof` are part of this event or results of execution of this event’s contents. It is designed so that it is easy

Reviewer 7: Wouldn't a third "event end" marker would be the non-transactional state changes?

Reviewer 2: There is no mechanism for a reader to differentiate non-transactional state changes from transactional state changes.  To a reader of the Block Stream, those are just additional state changes in the event.

Is it important to differentiate those in some way?  We might be missing another header if that's the case...

Reviewer 7: Ah, yes, that makes sense. I suppose the only part that is not correct is that if there are non-transaction state changes (i.e. like platform state changes or the sum of all changes to the transaction receipt queue), those are not a result of the last event's execution or contents. They are a consequence of the round as a whole. But I may be nit-picking wording here where not necessary. Feel free to close this comment if you think the distinction is not important.

Reviewer 3: Good detail. I added a snippet based on your suggestion. Thanks

> to reconstruct `GossipEvent`’s as needed for hashgraph reconstruction from the contents in the block stream. To make

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
to reconstruct `GossipEvent`s as needed for hashgraph reconstruction from the contents in the block stream. To make
```

release is expected to be 1 block containing 1 round. There is some fixed cost to each block, so batching multiple
rounds into a single block increases efficiency. However, the more rounds that are batched, the longer the end-to-end
latency for a transaction. So it is generally expected that the number of rounds per block will be kept low.

```protobuf
/**
 * A header for a single round.<br/>
 * This message delivers information about a consensus round.
 */
message RoundHeader {
    /**
     * A round number.<br/>
     * This is the number assigned to the round for consensus.
     */
    uint64 round_number = 1;
}
```

#### EventTransactions

A user transaction submitted to create a state change or query node state information. This message unifies the concepts
of user and system transactions, and matches the structure of Events within the hashgraph algorithm. A state signature
system transaction is a non-user transaction internally created to carry out a state change in conformance with network
hashgraph logic. This transaction does not count towards network TPS and can only be issued internally via the consensus

> platform.

Reviewer 7: Let's future proof this a bit
```suggestion
node software.
```

```protobuf
message EventTransaction {
    oneof transaction {
        /**
         * SignedTransaction serialized into bytes.
         * SignedTransaction is specified by the existing HAPI API.
         */
        bytes signedTransactionBytes = 1;

        /**
         * A single state signature.
         */
        StateSignatureSystemTransaction state_signature = 2;
    }
}
```

#### Reconstructing GossipEvents for Consensus Validation

The block stream supports complete reconstruction of the consensus event stream in a simple and secure manner. Any
entity wishing to reconstruct the event stream may begin with the `EventHeader` and append each following
`EventTransaction` *in order* as it appears in the Block Stream. The event ends when the next `EventHeader` or

> `Block Proof` is encountered in the stream.

Reviewer 7: or non-transactional state changes?

         * The result of running a transaction.
         */
        com.hedera.hapi.block.stream.output.TransactionResult transaction_result = 5;

        /**
         * A transaction output.
         */
        com.hedera.hapi.block.stream.output.TransactionOutput transaction_output = 6;

        /**
         * A set of state changes.
         */
        com.hedera.hapi.block.stream.output.StateChanges state_changes = 7;

        /**
         * Verification data for an item filtered from the stream.<br/>
         * This is a hash for a merkle tree node where the contents of that
         * part of the merkle tree have been removed from this stream.
         */
        FilteredItemHash filtered_item_hash = 8;

        /**
         * A signed block proof.<br/>
         * The signed merkle proof for this block. This will validate
         * a "virtual" merkle tree containing the previous block "virtual"
         * root, an "input" subtree, an "output" subtree, and
         * a "state changes" subtree.
         */
        BlockProof block_proof = 9;

        /**
         * A record file and associated data.
         */
        RecordFileItem record_file = 10;
    }
}

```

> All items in the block other than the final `BlockProof`, `RecordFileItem` and `FilteredItemHash` are either Input or

Reviewer 2: Minor adjustment to clarify that these are independent items.
```suggestion
All items in the block other than the final `BlockProof`, a `RecordFileItem`, or a `FilteredItemHash` are either Input or
```

Output items. This separation is important as they are hashed into two different sub-merkle-trees in the final proof.
We did not want to carry in each block item data representing which tree it was hashed in as that would waste a lot of
bytes. So which tree is defined _both_ by the protobuf package that message type is in and by a convention for the

> _file number_ assigned to the item in the this message. The reason they are split into input and output item sets is

Reviewer 2: Correction (we have field numbers, not file numbers):
```suggestion
_field number_ assigned to the item in this message. The reason they are split into input and output item sets is
```

Reviewer 3: Fixed

streams.

### Important Note Regarding Map Fields

The network will never add a `map` to a protobuf message in the Block Stream, and will not use a `map` for any value in
state. The protocol buffer implementations across different languages do not, and cannot, guarantee iteration order for
map entries and some implementations deliberately randomize the iteration order to "aggressively" prevent any code
from depending on map iteration order.

This unreliable iteration order has the consequence that block validation would fail non-deterministically when
encountering a different iteration order because the serialized bytes would not be in the same sequence and would not
generate the same hash. All implementations of block validation would be required to use custom protobuf libraries,
which would be required to use *the same* deterministic iteration order when serializing bytes, so that the generated
hash value would match every other implementation. The network values the freedom to implement a compliant Block Stream
consumer using any valid protocol buffer library and any computing language of choice, and therefore chooses not to use

> the `map` type in protobuf messages.

Reviewer 10: Speaking of custom protobuf implementation, it may be worth mentioning that `pbj` actually has support for maps that guarantees ordering (see https://github.com/hashgraph/pbj/pull/258).

Reviewer 2: Everything in block stream has to work with other protobuf implementations (e.g. protoc or tonic) as well; which means we cannot use maps in Block Streams.

---
hip: 1056
title: Block Streams
author: Jasper Potts <@jasperpotts>, Richard Bair <@rbair23>, Nana Essilfie-Conduah <@Nana-EC>,
Mark Blackman <mark@swirldslabs.com>
working-group: Jasper Potts <@jasperpotts>, Richard Bair <@rbair23>, Nana Essilfie-Conduah <@Nana-EC>,
Mark Blackman <mark@swirldslabs.com>, Leemon Baird, Joseph Sinclair <@jsync-swirlds>, Nick Poorman <@nickpoorman>,

> Kelly Greco <@poulok>, Steven Sheehy <@steven-sheehy>, Michael Tinker <@tinker-michaelj>

Reviewer 3: Had to work around this.
@mgarbs FYI

    */
    proto.Timestamp consensus_timestamp = 2;

    /**
    * In the record of an internal transaction, the consensus timestamp of the
    * user transaction that spawned it.
    */
    proto.Timestamp parent_consensus_timestamp = 3;

    /**
    * A schedule that executed this transaction, if this transaction
    * was scheduled.
    * <p>
    * This value SHALL NOT be set unless this transaction result represents
    * the result of a _scheduled_ child transaction.
    */
    proto.ScheduleID schedule_ref = 4;

    /**
    * The actual transaction fee charged, not the original transactionFee value
    * from TransactionBody.
    */
    uint64 transaction_fee_charged = 5;

    /**
    * All hbar transfers as a result of this transaction, such as fees, or
    * transfers performed by the transaction, or by a smart contract it calls, or
    * by the creation of threshold records that it triggers.
    */
    proto.TransferList transfer_list = 6;

    /**
    * All Token transfers as a result of this transaction.
    */
    repeated proto.TokenTransferList token_transfer_lists = 7;

    /**
    * All token associations implicitly created while handling this transaction.
    */

>     repeated proto.TokenAssociation automatic_token_associations = 8;

Reviewer 3: Initially items should be in Output. If however, a field becomes common to all transactions or can happen as part of another process that isn't exposed as an individual transaction then it may be move to output e.g. associations could happen outside of a user submitted TokenAssociation transaction

>     repeated proto.TokenAssociation automatic_token_associations = 8;

Reviewer 3: Will follow up to be explicit here

For example a `CryptoTransfer` transaction input will result in both a `TransactionResult` and a `CryptoTransferOutput`
to cover the outputs of the network.

```protobuf
message TransactionOutput {
    oneof transaction {
        /**
        * Output from a contract call transaction.
        */
        ContractCallOutput contract_call = 1;

        /**
        * Output from a contract create transaction.
        */
        ContractCreateOutput contract_create = 2;

        /**
        * Output from a crypto transfer transaction.
        */
        CryptoTransferOutput crypto_transfer = 3;

        /**
        * Output from an ethereum transaction.
        */
        EthereumOutput ethereum = 4;

        /**
        * Output from a schedule create transaction that executed
        * immediately on creation.
        */
        ScheduleCreateOutput schedule_create = 5;

        /**
        * Output from a schedule sign transaction that resulted in
        * executing the scheduled transaction.
        */
        ScheduleSignOutput schedule_sign = 6;

        /**
          * Output from a token airdrop transaction.
          */

>         TokenAirdropOutput token_airdrop = 7;

Reviewer 11: no `TokenClaimAirdropOutput`? Image such an output proto message should have `assessed_custom_fees` and `token_transfer_lists`.

Reviewer 2: Airdrop is special, claim does not charge fees, because the entity that sent the airdrop is required to pre-pay custom fees.
I _believe_ the state changes covers all transfers as a result.

        /**
        * Output from a UtilPrng transaction to request a
        * deterministic pseudo-random number.
        */
        UtilPrngOutput util_prng = 8;
    }
}
```

```protobuf
message ContractCallOutput {
    /**
     * A result for an Contract Call Transaction execution, either a create or call.
     */
    proto.ContractFunctionResult contract_function_result = 1;
 
    /**
     * The inter contract interaction details. This represents the internal EVM message frames.
     */
    repeated proto.ContractAction contract_actions = 2;
}
```

```protobuf
message ContractCreateOutput {
    /**
     * A result for a Contract Create Transaction execution.
     */
    proto.ContractFunctionResult contract_function_result = 1;
 
    /**
     * Contract bytecode during deployment
     */
    bytes initcode = 2;
 
    /**
     * Contract bytecode after deployment
     */

>     bytes runtime_bytecode = 3;

Reviewer 12: Won't this already be available in the state changes?

Reviewer 3: Not always. For those cases where it's not present in state changes this is stated in Trace data

 * Keys are often identifiers or scalar values.
 * Values are generally full messages or byte arrays.
 */
message MapUpdateChange {
    /**
    * A key in a virtual map.
    * <p>
    * This key MUST be mapped to the value added or updated.<br/>
    * This field is REQUIRED.
    */
    MapChangeKey key = 1;

    /**
    * A value in a virtual map.
    * <p>
    * This value MUST correctly represent the state of the map entry
    * _after_ the asserted update.<br/>
    * This value MAY be reduced to only transmit fields that differ
    * from the prior state.<br/>
    * This field is REQUIRED.
    */
    MapChangeValue value = 2;
}
```

```protobuf
/**
 * A removal of a single item from a `VirtualMap`.
 */
message MapDeleteChange {
    /**
    * A key in a virtual map.
    * <p>
    * This key SHALL be removed.<br/>
    * The mapped value SHALL also be removed.<br/>
    * This field is REQUIRED.
    */
    MapChangeKey key = 1;
}
```

```protobuf
/**
 * A key identifying a specific entry in a key-value "virtual map".
 */
message MapChangeKey {
    oneof key_choice {
        /**
        * A key for a change affecting a map keyed by an Account identifier.
        */

>         proto.AccountID account_id = 1;

Reviewer 12: The changes to the keys and value names were not also made to the protos in this PR. Will we be doing a mass sync from the md to the proto before merge? Or how else are we ensuring things are not getting out of sync?

Reviewer 2: We need to resync things, definitely.  There are some substantial changes being worked on that, I suspect, will require a good bit of changes across all four locations.  I think we'll need to resync at that point.

Reviewer 3: Items should be synced now.
Still observing changes in CN but everything would be exposed and synced with MN repo and this HIP before calling it final

    
    /**
    * A binary tree path to the tree node that is missing and replaced by the hash above.
    */
    uint64 filtered_path = 3;
}
```

> 💡 *Sidebar: Subsetting and Errata for Block Stream.*
Block stream supports subsetting the block stream through the use of a `FilteredItemHash` to
replace any item that has been removed. The removed item is thus replaced by its hash and the path that was filtered
(some removals may require simultaneous removal of a small subtree), which preserves the ability to verify the
integrity of the block stream and block proof.  Errata are handled similarly for removed items. Adding items *after the
fact* or replacing an erroneous item requires potentially removing a prior item, and adding the correction (errata) as a
new item in the block stream at the point of the “errata” transaction, which is then part of the block proof for the
block where the “errata” was processed.

#### Block Proof

The block proof carries the trust of the consensus network to the contents of the block. A block can conceptually be
represented as a binary merkle tree with 4 sub-trees at depth 2 which create the block proof and tree when hashed to
obtain a merkle root.

> ![Root Hashes](../assets/hip-1056/root_hashes.svg)

Reviewer 11: ```suggestion
![Root Hashes](../assets/hip-1056/root-hashes.svg)
```
The SVG file has two `Root of Input Merkle Tree`, and so missing `Root of Output Merkle Tree`

Reviewer 3: Fixed

- **File Naming and Retrieval**: v6 record stream files are named after the consensus timestamp of the first transaction
  they contain, requiring Mirror Nodes to perform frequent and costly LIST operations on cloud storage (GCS/S3) to find
  new files. The new block streams use sequential block numbers, eliminating the need for these expensive LIST
  operations. Mirror Nodes will read the stream from a block node that manages its own storage at a lower cost and won’t
  need to deal with cloud storage buckets.
- **Sidecar Data Integration**: In v6 record streams, sidecar files are created to serialize extra data such as smart
  contract logs outside the main record stream. Block streams will incorporate sidecar data into the unified stream.
- **Subset Support**: Any block node operator will be able to decide individually which data in the block stream to
  retain on disk, without breaking the cryptographic integrity of the block stream. Different block node operators in
  different legal jurisdictions can make different decisions about what data to retain. Or, block node operators may
  subset the stream to retain minimal data and minimize storage costs.

> - **Errata Handling**: Errata refers to software bugs where a node executed the transaction correctly but did not record

Reviewer 3: Added

  block.

### User Stories
1. As a downstream developer, I want a streamlined feed that contains all event, transactional, and state details of
   the network so that I can offer value-added services to the ecosystem.
2. As a downstream developer, I want each block of data to be verifiable with a single, aggregated signature, so that I
   can authenticate transactional data without the cost and complexity of downloading multiple signature files for
   verification.
3. As a verifier for a network, I want a single, self-contained stream of data with aggregated signature signed by a
   threshold of stake weights, so that I can cost-effectively confirm that the stream represents the consensus output of
   the network.
4. As a downstream developer, I want a low latency feed that provides the state changes associated with transaction(s)
   within a block, so that I can interact with state changes with the smallest possible delay.

## Specification

The Block Stream will be defined by the continuous transmission of Block information defined as follows.
- Each `Block` represents all inputs and outputs of the consensus network for zero or more whole `Rounds`. The maximum

>   number of rounds per block will be configurable and start at 1 round per block. It could be increased later if

Reviewer 3: @jasperpotts  and @netopyr ?

>   number of rounds per block will be configurable and start at 1 round per block. It could be increased later if

Reviewer 7: As soon as we allow for multiple rounds per block in production, there is more work on the CN side to coordinate state snapshots between services and platform such that only states that align with the end of a block are written to disk.

>   number of rounds per block will be configurable and start at 1 round per block. It could be increased later if

Reviewer 3: @steven-sheehy Multiple rounds per block was added on CN and I believe updated to manage state snapshots.

>   number of rounds per block will be configurable and start at 1 round per block. It could be increased later if

Reviewer 3: @jsync-swirlds Will circle back  to capture the Service suggestion

    /**
    * Output from an ethereum call transaction.
    */
    EthereumOutput ethereum_call = 4;

    /**
    * Output from a contract create transaction.
    */
    CreateContractOutput contract_create = 5;

    /**
    * Output from a schedule create transaction that executed
    * immediately on creation.
    */
    CreateScheduleOutput create_schedule = 6;

    /**
    * Output from a schedule sign transaction that resulted in
    * executing the scheduled transaction.
    */
    SignScheduleOutput sign_schedule = 7;
  }
}
```

```protobuf
message CryptoTransferOutput {
  /**
  * Custom fees assessed during a CryptoTransfer.
  * <p>
  * These fees SHALL be present in the full transfer list for the transaction.
  */
  repeated proto.AssessedCustomFee assessed_custom_fees = 1;
}
```

```protobuf
message UtilPrngOutput {
  oneof entropy {
    /**
    * A deterministic pseudo-random sequence of 48 bytes.
    */
    bytes prng_bytes = 1;

    /**
    * A deterministic pseudo-random number generated within a
    * specified range.
    */
    uint32 prng_number = 2;
  }
}
```

```protobuf
message CallContractOutput {
  /**
  * A list of additional outputs
  */

>   repeated proto.TransactionSidecarRecord sidecars = 1;

Reviewer 3: Agreed on the flattening.
We'll take a look

>   repeated proto.TransactionSidecarRecord sidecars = 1;

Reviewer 3: Maybe something like this

```protobuf
message CallContractOutput {
     /**
     * A result for an Ethereum Transaction execution, either a create or call.
     * <p>
     * This field SHALL contain all of the data produced by the contract
     * create transaction as well as basic accounting results.
     */
     proto.ContractFunctionResult contract_function_result = 1;
 
     /**
     * The storage changes to a smart contract's storage as a side effect of the function call.
     */
     repeated ContractStateChanges state_changes = 2;
 
     /**
     * The intercontract interaction details. This represents teh internal EVM message frames.
     */
     repeated ContractActions contract_actions = 3;
}

message CreateContractOutput {
     /**
     * A result for an Ethereum Transaction execution, either a create or call.
     * <p>
     * This field SHALL contain all of the data produced by the contract
     * create transaction as well as basic accounting results.
     */
     proto.ContractFunctionResult contract_function_result = 1;
 
     /**
     * Contract bytecode during deployment
     */
     bytes initcode = 3;
 
     /**
     * Contract bytecode after deployment
     */
     bytes runtime_bytecode = 4;
 
     /**
     * The storage changes to a smart contract's storage as a side effect of the function call.
     */
     repeated ContractStateChanges state_changes = 5;
 
     /**
     * The intercontract interaction details. This represents teh internal EVM message frames.
     */
     repeated ContractActions actions = 6;
}

message EthereumOutput {
    /**
     * An ethereum hash value.
     * <p>
     * This SHALL be a keccak256 hash of the ethereumData.
     */
    bytes ethereum_hash = 1;

    /**
    * A result for an Ethereum Transaction execution, either a create or call.
    * <p>
    * This field SHALL contain all of the data produced by the contract
    * create transaction as well as basic accounting results.
    */
    proto.ContractFunctionResult contract_function_result = 2;

    /**
    * Contract bytecode during deployment
    */
    bytes initcode = 3;

    /**
    * Contract bytecode after deployment
    */
    bytes runtime_bytecode = 4;

    /**
    * The storage changes to a smart contract's storage as a side effect of the function call.
    */
    repeated ContractStateChanges state_changes = 5;

    /**
    * The intercontract interaction details. This represents teh internal EVM message frames.
    */
    repeated ContractActions actions = 6;
}
```

>   repeated proto.TransactionSidecarRecord sidecars = 1;

Reviewer 3: @steven-sheehy , @jasperpotts and @jsync-swirlds pushed an improved layout for HSCS. Should be flatter, reuses where possible and ensure output types only contain info applicable to their transaction type

>   repeated proto.TransactionSidecarRecord sidecars = 1;

Reviewer 2: Got a little delayed on this, but is it necessary to duplicate the contract storage changes here?  Those should all be in the `StateChange` items (which follow the outputs).

>   repeated proto.TransactionSidecarRecord sidecars = 1;

Reviewer 3: Good point, If we can remove it because state changes captures it that's great, only problem is `ContractStateChange` calls out the contract_id. Can we infer that? If so then we can remove this

>   repeated proto.TransactionSidecarRecord sidecars = 1;

Reviewer 3: Moving this to open issues so it's not missed

  MapChangeKey key = 1;

  /**
  * A value in a virtual map.
  * <p>
  * This value MUST correctly represent the state of the map entry
  * _after_ the asserted update.<br/>
  * This value MAY be reduced to only transmit fields that differ
  * from the prior state.<br/>
  * This field is REQUIRED.
  */
  MapChangeValue value = 2;
}
```

```protobuf
/**
 * A removal of a single item from a `VirtualMap`.
 */
message MapDeleteChange {
  /**
  * A key in a virtual map.
  * <p>
  * This key SHALL be removed.<br/>
  * The mapped value SHALL also be removed.<br/>
  * This field is REQUIRED.
  */
  MapChangeKey key = 1;
}
```

```protobuf
/**
 * A key identifying a specific entry in a key-value "virtual map".
 */
message MapChangeKey {
  oneof key_choice {
    /**
    * A key for a change affecting a map keyed by an Account identifier.
    */
    proto.AccountID account_id_key = 1;

    /**
    * A change to the token relationships virtual map.<br/>
    * This map is keyed by the pair of account identifier and
    * token identifier.
    */
    proto.TokenAssociation token_relationship_key = 2;

    /**
    * A change to a map keyed by an EntityNumber (which is a whole number).
    */

>     google.protobuf.UInt64Value entity_number_key = 3;

Reviewer 3: @jsync-swirlds ?

>     google.protobuf.UInt64Value entity_number_key = 3;

Reviewer 2: I do not entirely recall; it might relate to some corner cases.
Perhaps @jasperpotts remembers more detail?

>     google.protobuf.UInt64Value entity_number_key = 3;

Reviewer 3: Will circle back and resolve

    google.protobuf.BytesValue proto_bytes_key = 6;

    /**
    * A change to a virtual map keyed by an int64 value.
    */
    google.protobuf.Int64Value proto_long_key = 7;

    /**
    * A change to a virtual map keyed by a string value.
    */
    google.protobuf.StringValue proto_string_key = 8;

    /**
    * A change to a virtual map keyed by a Schedule identifier.
    */
    proto.ScheduleID schedule_id_key = 9;

    /**
    * A change to the EVM storage "slot" virtual map.
    */
    proto.SlotKey slot_key_key = 10;

    /**
    * A change to a virtual map keyed by a Token identifier.
    */
    proto.TokenID token_id_key = 11;

    /**
    * A change to a virtual map keyed by a Topic identifier.
    */
    proto.TopicID topic_id_key = 12;

    /**
    * A change to a virtual map keyed by contract id identifier.
    */
    proto.ContractID contract_id_key = 13;

    /**
    * A change to a virtual map keyed by pending airdrop id identifier.
    */
    proto.PendingAirdropId pending_airdrop_id_key = 14;
  }
}
```

```protobuf
/**
 * A value updated in, or added to, a virtual map.
 */
message MapChangeValue {
  oneof value_choice {
    /**
    * An account value.
    */

>     proto.Account account_value = 1;

Reviewer 2: to distinguish them from the key.

>     proto.Account account_value = 1;

Reviewer 12: They're already in a MapChangeValue object. So it's already obvious from their containing object their intent.

>     proto.Account account_value = 1;

Reviewer 5: 100% lets make it SidecarFile much nicer. Easy enough to fix importer.

>     proto.Account account_value = 1;

Reviewer 5: I agree with Steven, seems unnecessary to have extra _value or extra _key. It is already contained in

>     proto.Account account_value = 1;

Reviewer 3: Removing `_value` suffix

    /**
    * An account identifier.<br/>
    * In some cases a map is used to connect a value or identifier
    * to another identifier.
    */
    proto.AccountID account_id_value = 2;

    /**
    * Compiled EVM bytecode.
    */
    proto.Bytecode bytecode_value = 3;

    /**
    * An Hedera "file" value.
    */
    proto.File file_value = 4;

    /**
    * A non-fungible/unique token value.
    */
    proto.Nft nft_value = 5;

    /**
    * A string value.
    */
    google.protobuf.StringValue proto_string_value = 6;

    /**
    * A scheduled transaction value.
    */
    proto.Schedule schedule_value = 7;

    /**
    * A list of scheduled transactions.<br/>
    * An example for this value is the map of consensus second to
    * scheduled transactions that expire at that consensus time.
    */
    proto.ScheduleList schedule_list_value = 8;

    /**
    * An EVM storage slot value.
    */

>     proto.SlotValue slot_value_value = 9;

Reviewer 2: Yes, unfortunate, but intentional.

**Example Pseudo Code for computing streaming merkle tree root hash**

```jsx
elements = [ ... ] // array of the leaves to be streamed and hashed. Items may be transaction inputs, transaction outputs or state
hashList = [] // a new empty list of hashes

// loop over each element received and create a list of all the root hashes of the leaves of the tree 
for (int i=0, i<elements.size(), i++) {
    write elements[i] // output elemen to stream
    e = hash(elements[i]) // SHA 384 item data
    hashList.add(e) // add hash to end of list
    
    // for every odd located element remove and hash the last 2 hashes (representing the hash leaves) and shift right per loop to pick up the hash root
    for (int n=i, (n & 1 == 1), n>>=1) {
        y = hashList.getAndRemove(hashList.size() – 1); // remove last element of hashList
        x = hashList.getAndRemove(hashList.size() – 1); // remove last element of hashList
        hashList.add(hash(x, y)); // add the new hash root of the two hashes
    }    
}

merkleRootHash = hashList.get(hashList.size() – 1)

for (int i=hashList.size() – 2, i>=0, i--) {
    merkleRootHash = hash(hashList.get(i), merkleRootHash)

> }

Reviewer 2: This feels too simple; I'm particularly concerned about the inner loop, as it does not _seem_ likely to produce the same hash order as building the tree would.  I might be missing something, however, so perhaps @jasperpotts can help verify if this is correct.

Reviewer 3: @derektriley confirmed this to be the case based on current services logic

block nodes and other handlers of the block stream to have single standardized APIs and handling code for blocks before
and after the switch to block streams. It is not possible to change the format because it is signed by the consensus
nodes in the original format. As a result of this a reader will still have to understand record file formats version 2,
3, 5 and 6 that existed prior to block streams. Each block of record style will have just one item: a `RecordFileItem`.

```protobuf
/**
 * A Block Item for record files.
 */
message RecordFileItem {
  /**
  * The block number of this block.
  */
  uint64 number = 1;

  /**
  * The consensus time the record file was produced for.<br/>
  * This comes from the record file name.
  */
  proto.Timestamp creation_time = 2;

  /**
  * The contents of a record file.<br/>
  * The first 4 bytes are a 32bit int little endian version number.
  * The versions that existed are 2,3,5 and 6.
  */
  bytes record_file_contents = 3;

  /**
  * The contents of sidecar files for this block.<br/>
  * Each block can have zero or more sidecar files.
  */

>   repeated bytes sidecar_file_contents = 4;

Reviewer 2: It would require parsing the sidecar file data when building these from the existing file data, and that's already a _very_ long and difficult process.
@jasperpotts was working on that last I heard, so you could ask if he's willing to make that change.

>   repeated bytes sidecar_file_contents = 4;

Reviewer 5: 100% lets make it SidecarFile much nicer. Easy enough to fix importer.

>   repeated bytes sidecar_file_contents = 4;

Reviewer 3: Updated

  /**
  * A hash algorithm.<br/>
  * This is the algorithm used to hash the block.
  * <p>
  * This SHOULD always be `SHA2_384`.
  */
  proto.BlockHashAlgorithm hash_algorithm = 5;

  /**
  * A collection of RSA signatures from consensus nodes.<br/>
  * These signatures validate the hash of the record_file_contents field.
  */
  repeated bytes record_file_hash_signatures = 6;
}

```

### Block Service
The consensus node will publish a stream of list of Block Items to a Block Node or block stream compatible client 
using a new block service API.

> The full API will be detailed in a separate Block Node HIP, however, it is important to call out the CN <> BN API.

Reviewer 3: Correct, will be moved to Block Node HIP

for every entity which has undesired impacts on state size.
Another inspired approach was that on the first observation of an entity in a block the CN would externalize the full entity state,
after that only the delta changes would be externalized for the remainder of the block.
In this way any consumer of a block would have the complete state by applying the diffs onto the initial state.
This shares the downside of requiring additional temporary storage, and also requires the creation of a "difference" form for every
entity potentially stored in state, and could, paradoxically, _increase_ the total size of blocks with very many changes to small entities.
Upon early POC considerations of compression the state size gains of the block stream size when compared to the record v6 externalized
stream mitigated the concerns and thus the explored solutions were not needed. 

### Including exchange_rate in the TransactionResult
In the past the exchange_rate details were in the transaction record. However, this information doesn't change often
and is based on the value of a system file. Changes to this file are externalized in the block stream, thus the current

> exchange rate value is always available via a MN (and future BN). Thus it is no longer necessary to store the

Reviewer 3: Updated

`exchange_rate` in the stream and we can remove unnecessary data from the block stream.

### Changing `EthereumOutput` to `EVMOutput`
`EthereumOutput` seemed more appropriate if called `EVMOutput`. However, this is a legacy item referring ot the
`EthereumTransaction` input whose name can't be changed for backwards compatibility. Since outputs in the Block Stream
must match the transaction input it would nopt be easy to change it. Additionally, there's a `ContractCall`,
`ContractCreate` and `EthereumTransaction`, `EVMOutput` would actually apply to all 3 and is thus too general.

## Open Issues
Open Issues captured here and in https://github.com/hashgraph/hedera-block-node/issues/37

- [ ] Q: Are there additional protocol buffer changes needed to reduce the
      stream overhead for Events, Transactions, or other frequent entities.
   - Transaction rearrangement - utilize new wrapper and remove old references
   - Potentially move previous block has from block header to block proof
   - Update smart contract output as its missing details
   - Optimizations to reduce number of message objects

>    - Ensure we are not double nesting in Transaction result vs Transaction output

Reviewer 2: We should include the "how to handle `File` content for large files" here, as that's an open question that may have somewhat significant impact (particularly w.r.t. "upgrade" files).

  second. In the future this could be shorter to lower latency, but would never make sense to be less than ping time.
- An `Event` contains a sequence of zero or more `EventTransactions` submitted by a single node.
- Each `EventTransaction` is either a `SignedTransaction` or a system transaction.
- A `SignedTransaction` is transmitted as a byte array, contains the signed transaction bytes of a user-submitted
  transaction exactly as processed by the network, and is followed by transaction outputs and state changes resulting
  from that transaction.
- System transactions are represented by explicitly defined protobuf messages and used for consensus node to consensus
  node communication.

These concepts are core to the Hashgraph consensus mechanism and have direct impacts on the structure of data in the 
streams.

Block streams are built out of Items. Those items can be delivered in a continuous stream containing one or more blocks.
Or they can be delivered as a single block using the `Block` message type container. If a single block is delivered as
a file it must be either a raw protobuf `Block` message with file name of `<BLOCK_NUMBER>.blk` e.g.

> `0000000000000000001.blk`. The file name contains a total of 19 digits to allow for 2^63 blocks. The file format may

Reviewer 12: Somewhere we need to define which buckets the data will reside. It should hopefully just be in the same buckets as the current record streams just in different paths.

Reviewer 2: Different lifecycle, different access (never public), and therefore different buckets.
Also, it's not part of the HIP; it's an internal decision for any entity that wishes to run a private block node to create a (private) archival bucket.

Reviewer 12: Will be a separate HIP.

> also be a compressed file e.g. `0000000000000000001.blk.gz` or `0000000000000000001.blk.ztsd`.

Reviewer 12: The common [extension](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Zstd#Usage) for zstd is `.zst`.

> also be a compressed file e.g. `0000000000000000001.blk.gz` or `0000000000000000001.blk.ztsd`.

Reviewer 12: This is ambiguous. The HIP presents three possible names for the block file in the bucket: 0000000000000000001.blk, 0000000000000000001.blk.gz, or 0000000000000000001.blk.zst. Since the filename is the API for how mirror nodes will consume it from the bucket, we have to explicitly pick one of these. Consensus nodes will only upload one of these three formats and if mirror nodes pick the wrong format then it won't work or it has to waste effort and try all 3 names.

Reviewer 2: The file name _is not_ an API.  We'll work out the _temporary_ storage of files in buckets independent of the Block Stream HIP, as the HIP _should_ neither mandate nor envision file-in-bucket storage as a long-term solution.

Reviewer 12: I just got out of a meeting where we discussed phase 1 being block streams in the bucket as the canonical source. So the file name will very much be an API if that's the case.

Reviewer 2: I would say we need to reconsider that, as the block stream is _not a file_, definitionally.
If we want a _separate_ HIP, that offers _temporary_ public access, then that might make sense, but making a temporary transitional access part of the permanent public API is not what I would consider well designed.

Reviewer 3: I believe there's a needed separation of the API the HIP is proposing and the API the team requires to achieve this goal in the interim to meet a schedule.
MNs consuming buckets is a project phasing optimization to get this out soon but is not an intention of this HIPs specification nor of long term usage. 
For instance a non Hedera run Mirror Node would consider this HIP functional and implemented when they can read from the block stream and should hopefully never have to pull from the cloud bucket.
However, for the project I do believe we must commit to one file format so MNs early on can commit to one format.

Reviewer 3: Alternatively, @steven-sheehy's suggestion is fair. 
Assuming the suggestion is CN will really have 2 output formats for Block Items ( (i) block streams and ii) BlockFile for special cases) and we should specify both for clarity.
@jasperpotts what do you think?

Reviewer 12: Will be a separate HIP.

> also be a compressed file e.g. `0000000000000000001.blk.gz` or `0000000000000000001.blk.ztsd`.

Reviewer 12: In addition to the filename, this HIP needs to define the path in the bucket where this file will reside. I suggest `/blocks/0000000000000000001.blk.zst` but open to alternatives.

Reviewer 2: This should not be defined in the HIP, as we will not be storing these files in public buckets long-term (and ideally will _never_ make this data available in public buckets).
The Block Nodes will provide the blocks via an API call, as a bytestream, based on block number; not as files.

Reviewer 12: Will be a separate HIP.

    /**
    * A single transaction.
    */
    com.hedera.hapi.platform.event.EventTransaction event_transaction = 4;

    /**
    * The result of running a transaction.
    */
    com.hedera.hapi.block.stream.output.TransactionResult transaction_result = 5;

    /**
    * A transaction output.
    */
    com.hedera.hapi.block.stream.output.TransactionOutput transaction_output = 6;

    /**
      * A set of state changes.
      */
    com.hedera.hapi.block.stream.output.StateChanges state_changes = 7;

    /**
    * Verification data for an item filtered from the stream.<br/>
    * This is a hash for a merkle tree node where the contents of that
    * part of the merkle tree have been removed from this stream.
    */
    FilteredItemHash filtered_item_hash = 8;

    /**
    * A signed block proof.<br/>
    * The signed merkle proof for this block. This will validate
    * a "virtual" merkle tree containing the previous block "virtual"
    * root, an "input" subtree, an "output" subtree, and
    * a "state changes" subtree.
    */
    BlockProof block_proof = 9;

    /**
    * A record file and associated data.
    */
    RecordFileItem record_file = 10;
  }

> }

Reviewer 2: The "fixed" indent is using the wrong settings:
1. indentation should be 4 spaces, not 2
1. comments should line up on `*`, so every line after the first should be indented one extra space.

### Example
```protobuf
        /**
         * A signed block proof.<br/>
         * The signed merkle proof for this block. This will validate
         * a "virtual" merkle tree containing the previous block "virtual"
         * root, an "input" subtree, an "output" subtree, and
         * a "state changes" subtree.
         */
        BlockProof block_proof = 9;

        /**
         * A record file and associated data.
         */
        RecordFileItem record_file = 10;
    }
}
```

latency for a transaction. So it is generally expected that the number of rounds per block will be kept low.

```protobuf
/**
 * A header for a single round.<br/>
 * This message delivers information about a consensus round.
 */
message RoundHeader {
  /**
  * A round number.<br/>
  * This is the number assigned to the round for consensus.
  */
  uint64 round_number = 1;
}
```

#### EventTransactions

A user transaction submitted to create a state change or query node state information. This message unifies the concepts
of user and system transactions, and matches the structure of Events within the hashgraph algorithm. A state signature
system transaction is a non-user transaction internally created to carry out a state change in conformance with network
hashgraph logic. This transaction does not count towards network TPS and can only be issued internally via the consensus
node software.

```protobuf
message EventTransaction {
  oneof transaction {
    /**
    * SignedTransaction serialized into bytes.
    * SignedTransaction is specified by the existing HAPI API.
    */

>     bytes signedTransactionBytes = 1;

Reviewer 11: should this be snake_case too?

```suggestion
    bytes signed_transaction_bytes = 1;
```

Reviewer 3: Yes, fixing

</aside>

```protobuf
message TransactionOutput {
  oneof transaction {
    /**
    * Output from a crypto transfer transaction.
    */
    CryptoTransferOutput crypto_transfer = 1;

    /**
    * Output from a utilPrng transaction to request a
    * deterministic pseudo-random number.
    */
    UtilPrngOutput util_prng = 2;

    /**
    * Output from a contract call transaction.
    */
    CallContractOutput contract_call = 3;

    /**
    * Output from an ethereum call transaction.
    */
    EthereumOutput ethereum_call = 4;

    /**
    * Output from a contract create transaction.
    */
    CreateContractOutput contract_create = 5;

    /**
    * Output from a schedule create transaction that executed
    * immediately on creation.
    */
    CreateScheduleOutput create_schedule = 6;

    /**
    * Output from a schedule sign transaction that resulted in
    * executing the scheduled transaction.
    */
    SignScheduleOutput sign_schedule = 7;
  }
}
```

```protobuf
message CryptoTransferOutput {
  /**
  * Custom fees assessed during a CryptoTransfer.
  * <p>
  * These fees SHALL be present in the full transfer list for the transaction.
  */

>   repeated proto.AssessedCustomFee assessed_custom_fees = 1;

Reviewer 11: HIP-991 will enable custom fees for topics, and most likely this field will be used to externalize the custom fees charged for a consensus submit message transaction. Should we take the opportunity and rename `CryptoTransferOutput` to be generic?

Reviewer 2: It is probably more appropriate, as part of `HIP-991`, to add `assessed_custom_fees` to `SubmitMessageOutput` and include that message in `TransactionOutput` (to be generated when a consensus submit charges custom fees).

Reviewer 12: I think Xin is saying that since now `AssessedCustomFee` will appear in at least two transaction types and probably more in the future, instead of adding it to each different output we should consider pulling it up to the `TransactionResult` since it's more common. This is important to consider now, not in HIP-991 since it's a breaking change later.

Reviewer 2: The design thus far has been to add outputs for a given transaction to a transaction-specific output (for the few transactions that have outputs).

Changing that, at least in this case, would make it much harder to filter the block stream to, for example, only show the activity for consensus service transactions, as you would _also_ need to read all of a "generic" set of outputs and tie them to specific transactions (so the filter would need to be stateful).

It's certainly an option, but I would suggest that maximizing the options for stateless filters in the Block Stream is worth the minor duplication of concepts (no _data_ would be duplicated, of course).

Reviewer 12: Once an output starts appearing on more than one transaction type and if we think it might appear in more we should consider moving it to `TransactionResult`. This is already the case for fields in the `TransactionResult` and we'd be following the same model. `TokenTransferList` appears in the result but it only applies to `TokenReject`, `TokenAirdrop`, and `CryptoTransfer`. `TokenAssociation` in the result only applies to `TokenCreate` and `CryptoTransfer`. There is strong precedent to consider `AssessedCustomFee` to be the same.

Reviewer 2: That's not how I view it, but it's entirely possible my view is not correct.

As I view these items, `TransactionResult` is _mostly_ items that are _global_ to all transactions, as well as a few items that are currently expected by Mirror Node in the record stream but would be difficult to move into individual transaction results.
Ideally, in my opinion, we _would_ move those "extra" items into individual transaction results, or state changes, and `TransactionResult` would be reduced to just the properly "global" items like status, consensus timestamps, congestion multiplier, and transaction fee; perhaps paid staking rewards (not sure if that's universal or specific) as well.

Reviewer 3: These are valid considerations.
 
Personally I wish `TransactionResult` was not needed or at the least was exactly as @jsync-swirlds noted and didn't include `transfer_list`, `token_transfer_lists` or `automatic_token_associations` which are present because they are results from transactions that differ from their usual associated transaction type.

@steven-sheehy and @xin-hedera are right that there's a precedence here to add  `assessed_custom_fees`.
My concern is what else does that open the door and how do we ensure consistency and ability to manage future pivots.
However, if we rely on future move of items in a specific output type to the general `TransactionResult` we might require multiple deprecations of those fields to avoid duplication. For instance if Block Stream were already in use we'd now be considering how to stop using `CryptoTransferOutput.assessed_custom_fees` and how to start using `TransactionResult.assessed_custom_fees`. This will certainly happen again for other fields as HAPI continues to mature.

Reviewer 3: @jsync-swirlds how does the inclusion of `assessed_custom_fees` impact filtering functionality in a way different from say `token_transfer_lists` or `automatic_token_associations`?

Reviewer 3: @steven-sheehy what's the downside if `assessed_custom_fees` appeared in both `CryptoTransferOutput` and `TokenAirdropOutput`? Is it just the duplication the protobuf and the parsing consideration to look in more than one object for the same value depending on transaction type? Is this better as it ensure transaction types are more self contained?

Reviewer 2: Token transfer list and automatic associations are both present elsewhere; their inclusion here is duplicative, and actually _very hard_ to remove if a redaction were to become necessary.  Both of the mentioned current fields are already a problem for redaction and filtering.  Basically we can redact whole messages and preserve the block proof, but if we _change_ a single message (say, to remove custom fees related to a redacted message), the block proof will not validate, so we could remove the message that related to a custom fee (perhaps an HCS submit), but could not remove the related custom fees from this message, which limits how thoroughly we could comply with a redaction request.
For general filtering it's possible to filter out the state change, transaction, and outputs that duplicate the data here; but this data would likely remain in the stream unless this output message was also filtered (which would require a complex filter, and associated higher charge).
Part of the reason for being very careful to minimize fields in this message is to reduce cases where redaction is limited and filtering is more complex.

are sent) was considered. In this case every entity could have a last updated counter that is updated on entity changes, if the
value is over a certain threshold then the whole entity is externalized, if not only deltas would be externalized. This would optimize
how far back a client would have to go to retrieve state info. However, this approach would require the counter to be stored in state
for every entity which has undesired impacts on state size.
Another inspired approach was that on the first observation of an entity in a block the CN would externalize the full entity state,
after that only the delta changes would be externalized for the remainder of the block.
In this way any consumer of a block would have the complete state by applying the diffs onto the initial state.
This shares the downside of requiring additional temporary storage, and also requires the creation of a "difference" form for every
entity potentially stored in state, and could, paradoxically, _increase_ the total size of blocks with very many changes to small entities.

### Including exchange_rate in the TransactionResult

> In the past the exchange_rate details were in the transaction record. However, this information doesn't change often and is based on
> the value of a system file. Changes to this file are externalized to the MN and thus the current exchange rate value is always available
> via a MN (or future BN). Thus the exchange rate is readily available from the MN when using the transaction timestamp as input.
> This allowed us to removing it and reduce unnecessary data from the block stream.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In the past the exchange_rate details were in the transaction record.
However, this information doesn't change often and is based on the value
of a system file. Changes to this file are also externalized in the
Block Stream, thus the current exchange rate value is available in the state
changes and we can remove it to reduce unnecessary data in the block stream.
```

Reviewer 2: The move from 120 to 80 is just my own habit because it makes github "suggestions" easy to read; I do not know of any requirement that you stick to it or reformat the entire file to match.

I removed the note about MN because it does not justify removing the value from the BlockStream.  If the exchange rate details are not _somewhere_ in the BlockStream, then MN _will not_ have the value. MN has to get the value _from_ the BlockStream, so claiming we can remove the data because it's available in MN is somewhat circular, in my opinion.

## Open Issues
Open Issues captured here and in https://github.com/hashgraph/hedera-block-node/issues/37

> - [ ] Q: Are the current block sizes acceptable to not need to adopt an entity state changes splitting strategy?
> - [ ] Q: Is it clear which block contains a block proof and state hash regarding that block?
>     - Currently a block will contain it's own proof. The state hash a block contains however is the hash at the begining of the block/end
>     of the previous block. The state hash representing the changes to state made by a given block are found in the next block. 
>     State proofs for block N thus require the state following block N, and the block proof from block N+1.
> - [ ] Q: There are some cases where multiple changes made to a singleton state type over the course of a round will be consolidated into a single change set for that singleton type for the round instead. How do those fit into the stream and block merkle tree? Do they need to be placed somewhere specific both in the stream and in the tree?
> - [ ] Q: Should TransferList be included in the TransactionResult object or not.  It seems closer to an input and output.
>     - Couldn't a MN that parses the block stream take changes to the transferList in the TransactionResult? 
>     There are considerations for emergent transfer logic that isn’t in the transaction body which may prevent this.
> - [ ] Q: Is the current algorithm for Block hash calculation accurate based on latest services explorations?
> - [ ] Q: Should we include a string error message in the block stream to give improved DexExp when troubleshooting transaction failures?
> - [ ] Q: Are redaction and errata and how FilteredBlockItem can be used to achieve them adequately described?
> - [ ] Q: Can we change EthereumOutput to EVMOutput? it seems more accurate to cover EVM transactions
>     - An argument against this is that Outputs match to the transaction input. Since there's a ContractCall, ContractCreate and
>     EThereumTransaction it would be inconsistent.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- [ ] Q: Is the current compression approach sufficient to maintain manageable block size and
      avoid adopting an entity state changes splitting strategy?
- [ ] Q: Are there additional protocol buffer changes needed to reduce the stream overhead
      for Events, Transactions, or other frequent entities.
- [ ] Q: Is it clear which block contains a block proof and state hash regarding that block?
   - A block will contain it's own proof. The state hash a block contains however is the
     hash at the begining of the block/end of the previous block. The state hash representing the
     changes to state made by a given block are found in the next block. State proofs after block N
     thus require the state at the end of block N, and the block proof from block N+1.
- [ ] Q: There are some cases where multiple changes made to a singleton state type over the course
      of a round will be consolidated into a single change set for that singleton type for the
      round instead. How do those fit into the stream and block merkle tree? Do they need to be
      placed somewhere specific both in the stream and in the tree?
   - Actually, it's possible these must be reported multiple times instead of holding them
     to a single later update. The reason being that out-of-order state changes, or skipped
     state changes could produce a different total order of updates, and change the state hash.<br/>
     This needs to be verified with the services, platform, and platform-data experts.
- [ ] Q: Should TransferList be included in the TransactionResult object or not. It contains
      redundant data, but makes mirror node processing much simpler.
   - Could a MN that parses the block stream reconstruct the transfer list from state changes?<br/>
     There are considerations for emergent transfer logic that isn’t in the transaction body which
     may prevent this.
- [ ] Q: Is the current algorithm for Block hash calculation accurate based on latest services
      explorations?
- [ ] Q: Should we include a string error message in the block stream to give improved DexExp when
      troubleshooting transaction failures?
   - Should we, alternatively, offer a detail error _number_, defined on a per-result-code basis,
     and published as a set of  enumerations? This numeric option would greatly reduce extra data
     in the block stream and avoid unclear or "bit-rotted" error strings. 
- [ ] Q: Are redaction and errata and how FilteredBlockItem can be used to achieve them adequately
      described?
- [ ] Q: Can we change EthereumOutput to EVMOutput? it seems more accurate to cover EVM transactions
   - An argument against this is that Outputs match to the transaction input. Since there's a
     ContractCall, ContractCreate and EthereumTransaction it would be inconsistent.
```

before transaction execution and are the input to transaction execution. Output items are those produced during
transaction execution. These are hashed separately into two different *block stream* merkle sub-trees. This is done so
we can separate out a subset of historical blocks with just their input items, or just output items. That subset block
stream could then be used for transaction replay or transaction execution verification, for example.

![Block Stream Merkle Tree](../assets/hip-1056/block-stream-merkle.svg)

Consensus nodes have a `state merkle tree`, which is a merkle tree containing the current state of the consensus node.
At each block boundary, the state merkle tree is a depth two *subtree* of a `block merkle tree`. 
The block merke tree is a binary merkle tree whose four subtrees at depth two also include the block's input items,
the block's output items, and the merkle tree of the previous block. 
Of course Hash computation for the block `N` merkle tree reuses the hash computed for the block `N-1` merkle tree.

<aside>
Merkle Item Order vs Block Item Order: The order in which items appear in the block merkle tree are not the same 

> order in which are streamed.

Reviewer 3: Added snippet to text

the address book with network stake weight must be collected and verified before a record file can be verified. This design
challenge makes it difficult to support a "dynamic address book", which is a hard requirement for permissionless nodes.

To make each block within a block stream independently verifiable, the use of an aggregated signature is leveraged.
Aggregated signatures allow the verification of multiple node signatures to be processed using a single public key.
Therefore, a user can verify that a block was signed by a sufficient stake weight within the network by verifying a single
aggregated signature. TSS-BLS signatures were selected because of their ability to support partial share signatures
assigned on a weighted number of shares per node with a threshold value required for verification. Additionally,
adopting TSS-BLS allows the network to utilize a single semi-permanent public ledger id to verify the signature. This
offers a valuable system optimization as no matter how much the network node membership changes, the same ledger id can
be used to verify the aggregated signature. TSS-BLS signatures are also reasonably efficient when used within smart

> contracts. A state proof based on this signature can be verified by a smart contract on another ledger for little cost.

Reviewer 3: This was adopted

| I sent  an HCS message to a topic in block-number `x`.  Nobody sent any messages to that topic until block-number y; y >> x. I want to prove that my message was included in the topic | Block Item Proof (`x`) |
| I sent  an HCS message to a topic in block-number x.  Many people sent many messages to that topic until block-number y; y >> x. I want to prove that my original message at block-number x was included in the topic. | Block Item Proof (`x`) |
| I executed a Smart Contract call in block-number x. I want to prove that *all* actions triggered by that smart contract (e.g. other contracts it called, HTS or Account transactions it generated) took place | Block Item Proof(s) (`x`) |
| I submitted (or signed) a scheduled transaction in block-number x. My scheduled-transaction executed as in block-number y; y >> x. I want to prove that my transaction executed at y. | Block Item Proof (`x`) / State Proof (`y`) |
| I submitted (or signed) a scheduled transaction in block-number x. My scheduled-transaction expired because it didn’t get sufficient signatures. I want to prove that my scheduled transaction expired at y. | Block Item Proof (`x`) / State Proof (`y`) |

> | I did a transaction in block-number x. I didn’t make any transaction until block-number y; y >> x. My entity (account, contract, file, token, topic, or schedule) expired at y. I want to prove that my entity expired at y. | Block Item Proof (`x`) |

Reviewer 3: Adopted the suggestions

<aside>
🚨 **Open Task: Confirm table capturing multiple sceanarios and if they are proveable and by what proof type and which block.

> </aside>

Reviewer 3: Fixed these by moving them all to Open Issues and using the markdown quote to highlight some sentences

#### Design for State Changes

Including state changes within the block stream is a significant foundational step towards enhancing the
decentralization of the network. This inclusion allows for the development of alternative node implementations and
enables downstream state-related services such as state proofs, state snapshots, and reconnect services. It also
provides a low latency feed of the contents of state as it changes to applications. This can open doors to exciting new
latency critical application ideas and concepts that could not be built before.

To enable this, state in the consensus node will be restructured into simple named states. This allows for state changes
to be expressed as simple CRUD operations on named states. This is so downstream consumers do not have to understand the
full complexity of the merkle state tree.

## Personas and User Stories

> **Personas:**

Reviewer 3: Fixed

- _Downstream Developer_: A provider of value-added services utilizing block streams
- _Verifier_: Any person or service required to verify the integrity of a block or the information contained within a
  block.

> **User Stories:**

Reviewer 3: Fixed

- Each `EventTransaction` is either a `SignedTransaction` or a system transaction.
- A `SignedTransaction` is transmitted as a byte array, contains the signed transaction bytes of a user-submitted
  transaction exactly as processed by the network, and is followed by transaction outputs and state changes resulting
  from that transaction.
- System transactions are represented by explicitly defined protobuf messages and used for consensus node to consensus
  node communication.

These concepts are core to the Hashgraph consensus mechanism and have direct impacts on the structure of data in the 
streams.

Block streams are built out of Block Items. Those items can be delivered in a continuous stream representing one or
more blocks. Items can also be grouped and delivered as a single block using the `Block` message type container.
If a single block is delivered as a file it must be either a raw protobuf `Block` message with file name of
`<BLOCK_NUMBER>.blk` e.g.`0000000000000000001.blk`. The file name contains a total of 19 digits to allow for 2^63
blocks. The file format may also be a compressed file e.g. `0000000000000000001.blk.gz` or

> `0000000000000000001.blk.ztsd`.

Reviewer 3: Removed

         * The result of running a transaction.
         */
        com.hedera.hapi.block.stream.output.TransactionResult transaction_result = 5;

        /**
         * A transaction output.
         */
        com.hedera.hapi.block.stream.output.TransactionOutput transaction_output = 6;

        /**
         * A set of state changes.
         */
        com.hedera.hapi.block.stream.output.StateChanges state_changes = 7;

        /**
         * Verification data for an item filtered from the stream.<br/>
         * This is a hash for a merkle tree node where the contents of that
         * part of the merkle tree have been removed from this stream.
         */
        FilteredItemHash filtered_item_hash = 8;

        /**
         * A signed block proof.<br/>
         * The signed merkle proof for this block. This will validate
         * a "virtual" merkle tree containing the previous block "virtual"
         * root, an "input" subtree, an "output" subtree, and
         * a "state changes" subtree.
         */
        BlockProof block_proof = 9;

        /**
         * A record file and associated data.
         */
        RecordFileItem record_file = 10;
    }
}

```

> All items in the block other than the final `BlockProof` and `FilteredItemHash` are either Input or Output items. This

Reviewer 3: Improved

separation is important as they are hashed into two different sub-merkle-trees in the final proof. We did not want to
carry in each block item data representing which tree it was hashed in as that would waste a lot of bytes. So which tree

> is defined by the protobuf package that message type is in. The reason they are split into input and output item sets is

Reviewer 3: Updated

> is defined by the protobuf package that message type is in. The reason they are split into input and output item sets is

Reviewer 2: Got a little mangled in translation; but that's in a separate comment.

this opens the door for using the block stream format to describe the data passed from consensus to transaction
processing.

> The division into block items also enables filtering of data based on data type. For example a downstream services could

Reviewer 3: Updated

have output, each one that does has a corresponding output message type with any data it needs to include.

<aside>
🚨 **Open Task: Update section with missing TransactionOutput objects**.
</aside>

```protobuf
message TransactionOutput {
  oneof transaction {
    /**
    * Output from a crypto transfer transaction.
    */
    CryptoTransferOutput crypto_transfer = 1;

    /**
    * Output from a utilPrng transaction to request a
    * deterministic pseudo-random number.
    */
    UtilPrngOutput util_prng = 2;

    /**
    * Output from a contract call transaction.
    */
    CallContractOutput contract_call = 3;

    /**
    * Output from an ethereum call transaction.
    */
    EthereumOutput ethereum_call = 4;

    /**
    * Output from a contract create transaction.
    */
    CreateContractOutput contract_create = 5;

    /**
    * Output from a schedule create transaction that executed
    * immediately on creation.
    */
    CreateScheduleOutput create_schedule = 6;

    /**
    * Output from a schedule sign transaction that resulted in
    * executing the scheduled transaction.
    */
    SignScheduleOutput sign_schedule = 7;
  }

> }

Reviewer 4: Concerning topic messages. Is it correct to say that the `message` from the topic message will not appear in the block stream transaction result, transaction output, or state changes? (Even if `SubmitMessageOutput` is added here, it doesn't look like it contains the `message`).

If so, when processing blocks the mirror node will no longer be able to parse or store the topic message.

---
hip: 1056
title: Block Streams

> author: Jasper Potts <@jasperpotts>, Richard Bair <@rbair23>, Nana Essilfie-Conduah <@Nana-EC>,
> Mark Blackman <mark@swirldslabs.com>, Edward Wertz<@edward-swirldslabs>
> working-group: Jasper Potts <@jasperpotts>, Richard Bair <@rbair23>, Nana Essilfie-Conduah <@Nana-EC>,
> Mark Blackman <mark@swirldslabs.com>, Leemon Baird, Joseph Sinclair <@jsync-swirlds>, Nick Poorman <@nickpoorman>,
> Kelly Greco <@poulok>, Steven Sheehy <@steven-sheehy>, Michael Tinker <@tinker-michaelj>, 
> Edward Wertz<@edward-swirldslabs>

Reviewer 13: fix YAML parse error by adding multi-line syntax
```suggestion
author: >-
  Jasper Potts <@jasperpotts>, Richard Bair <@rbair23>, Nana Essilfie-Conduah <@Nana-EC>,
  Mark Blackman <mark@swirldslabs.com>, Edward Wertz<@edward-swirldslabs>
working-group: >-
  Jasper Potts <@jasperpotts>, Richard Bair <@rbair23>, Nana Essilfie-Conduah <@Nana-EC>,
  Mark Blackman <mark@swirldslabs.com>, Leemon Baird, Joseph Sinclair <@jsync-swirlds>, Nick Poorman <@nickpoorman>,
  Kelly Greco <@poulok>, Steven Sheehy <@steven-sheehy>, Michael Tinker <@tinker-michaelj>, 
  Edward Wertz<@edward-swirldslabs>
```

The block stream items are split into two types: inputs and outputs. The input items are those known after consensus but
before transaction execution and are the input to transaction execution. Output items are those produced during
transaction execution. These are hashed separately into two different *block stream* merkle sub-trees. This is done so
we can separate out a subset of historical blocks with just their input items, or just output items. That subset block
stream could then be used for transaction replay or transaction execution verification, for example.

![Block Stream Merkle Tree](../assets/hip-1056/block-stream-merkle.svg)

Consensus nodes have a `state merkle tree`, which is a merkle tree containing the current state of the consensus node.
At each block boundary, the state merkle tree is a depth two *subtree* of a `block merkle tree`. 
The block merke tree is a binary merkle tree whose four subtrees at depth two also include the block's input items,
the block's output items, and the merkle tree of the previous block. 
Of course Hash computation for the block `N` merkle tree reuses the hash computed for the block `N-1` merkle tree.

> > Merkle Item Order vs Block Item Order: The order in which items appear in the block merkle tree are not the same 

Reviewer 7: I'm quite confused by this paragraph. There seem to be two contradictory statements:

> The order in which items appear in the block merkle tree are not the same order in which are streamed

vs

> The left-to-right order of merkle leaves must be the order in which those items are encountered in the stream.

Reviewer 2: I _believe_ the intent here is to note that items are split into multiple subtrees, and strict in-order traversal of the combined tree will not match the stream order.

Reviewer 3: Definiton was updated

> > order in which are streamed. The left-to-right order of merkle leaves must be the order in which those items are

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
> order in which they are streamed. The left-to-right order of merkle leaves must be the order in which those items are
```

Reviewer 3: Fixed

> encountered in the stream. Some items are in the "input" subtree and some are in the "output" subtree, within those
> trees the order will be the same as stream-order.

> State Merkle Hash: A block contains the state hash that represents the state at the beginning of the block. 
> The hash of the state at the end of the block is found in the next block. This is because it takes time to gather state

> > changes of the block and hash them, waiting for this process would result in the block delivery time being held up.

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
> changes of the block and hash them, and waiting for this process would result in the block delivery time being held up.
```

> Rapid block times is a goal of the block stream and thus a tradeoff is made to ensure minimum latency. 
> The impact of this choice is that a state proof for verification of block `N` requires block `N+1`.
> However, the state proof can still be calculated by all the data contained in block `N`. A block is self contained!

#### Design for Verifiability

Existing record files contain the following cryptographic properties.

Record file contents are summarized in a chain of hashes, with each file's contents containing the hash of the previous
file so that the hash of the current file depends on the contents of the entire record stream.
Additionally, each consensus node on the Hedera mainnet signs a hash of the record files as it is
produced, enabling mirror nodes and other downstream services to verify that the record file was produced and attested

> by a majority stake weight of the network nodes. A major drawback of the current design is that multiple signature files and

Reviewer 7: I know I've said this before, but using the term "stake weight" is very strange. There stake, and there is weight. Stake is measured in hbars. Weight is unit-less and determined from total network stake. If we mean weight, just say "weight". But maybe there has been an agreement to use "stake weight" that I'm not aware of?

Reviewer 3: Hmm, there was a correction to utilize stake weight.
Let me confirm, @jsync-swirlds thoughts?

Reviewer 2: I think using stake weight everywhere is fine; we should make sure it's defined however.

Reviewer 7: Does that mean we will have 3 terms, `stake`, `weight`, and `stake weight` where the last two are equivalent? These seems exceedingly confusing.

Reviewer 3: Will circle back but right now it's consistently used

Tree, calculate the root hash, and verify the signature with the network Ledger ID.
2. Block Item Proof - This proof proves that a given object was present in a Block. This is just as powerful as proving
a value was in state. In detail, the Block Item Proof is a Merkle Proof created for a single BlockItem within a Block.
This proves that the network consensus agreed to the content of that specific item (input, output, or state change) in
that specific block. This can prove, among other values, the content of an HCS message, the state of an Account changed
in that block, or the content of a transaction submitted in that block. We can construct a BlockItem Proof from a Block
Proof and contents of the Block. 
3. State Proof - This proof proves a given state value at a given block number was agreed upon by a majority stake
weight of the network. In detail, the state proof is a Merkle Proof created for a value in network consensus state at a
particular point in consensus time. This proves that the network consensus state contained a particular value at a
specific consensus timestamp. This might prove, among other values, the balance of an Account, the state of a Smart

> Contract, or the properties of an HTS non-fungible token. 

Reviewer 7: Fantastic descriptions! Thank you!

  necessary for performance reasons or if rounds become very frequent and small.
    - A block *may* be zero rounds because the last block prior to a network "freeze" must communicate the state hash
      (via a block proof) of the state immediately prior to network shutdown. This is only possible with an extra empty
      block because the state hash in each block proof is the state hash at the *beginning* of that block/round. This
      delay of state hash communication is required to simultaneously meet Hedera performance goals and also meet EVM
      expectations for immediate access to recent (the last 256) block hash values.
- A `Round` contains a sequence of zero or more `Events` that have reached consensus at the same time. Round length in real
  world time depends on internet latency and event creation rate. In Hedera mainnet today it is around 1 round per
  second. In the future this could be shorter to lower latency, but would never make sense to be less than ping time.
- An `Event` contains a sequence of zero or more `EventTransactions` submitted by a single node.
- Each `EventTransaction` is either a `SignedTransaction` or a system transaction.

> - A `SignedTransaction` is transmitted as a byte array, contains the signed transaction bytes of a user-submitted

Reviewer 7: This has changes since this HIP was written. We are in the process of merging the only system transaction we have into the hedera-defined transaction structure. I believe all the transactions will be `SignedTransaction` and the say you differentiate a system vs user submitted transaction is looking at a flag in the TransactionBody or determining it based on the TransactionBody oneof type (StateSignatureTransaction will be one of these types)

timestamp of the last transaction in the previous round plus 1,000 nanoseconds, rounded up to the nearest 1,000 nanoseconds.
If there is no previous round, then the round timestamp is the median of the judge created times.
This logic derives the value of the `BlockHeader` item `first_transaction_consensus_time` property. 

#### EventHeader

The event header depicts the beginning of an event. All items after this and before the next `EventHeader` or
`BlockProof` are part of this event or results of execution of this event’s contents. It is designed so that it is easy
to reconstruct `GossipEvent`s as needed for hashgraph reconstruction from the contents in the block stream. To make
that easy `EventHeader` includes `EventCore` that is part of `GossipEvent` and all transactions are defined as
`EventTransaction` which can be used unchanged to construct the original `GossipEvent`.

> Note: If there are non-transaction state changes (i.e. platform state changes or the sum of all changes to the
transaction receipt queue), those are not a result of the last event's execution or contents. 

> They are a consequence of the round as a whole.

Reviewer 7: Sorry, I didn't mean for my words to be added verbatim. Platform state changes are made as a result of the round and not transactions. The sum of all changes to the transaction receipt queue are definitely from transactions. The unique aspect is that it is a single state change from many transactions.

}
```

> > Note: The block stream design ensures consistency of singleton and queue states at round boundaries so as to reduce the

Reviewer 7: Great addition, thank you!

block stream size. That is singleton and queue state changes are written to the block stream at the end of a round.

> The platform computes the state hash at round boundaries, and the consensus node tracks these hashes, when a block ends

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
The platform computes the state hash at round boundaries, and the consensus node tracks these hashes. When a block ends
```

Reviewer 3: Fixed
